# Processing Pigs 

Processing pigs at an early age is a critical step in hog production. Within the hog industry when producers discuss processing pigs, it typically refers to the act of administering iron, castrating, and identification of piglets within their first week of life. Processing pigs is a fairly easy procedure and every hog producer should be familiar with. This article will serve as a general guide for the most common practices associated with early pig processing. 

## Counting pigs
Keeping an accurate count of litter size is an influential variable in hog production. Therefore, recording information for each litter born is a task that should be completed when processing. Sow cards are to be kept for each breeding female on the farm. For every parity that a female produces certain information is recorded. The common variables that are reported are: total number of pigs born, total number of pigs born alive, and the total number of stillborn or mummies in each litter. Whenever a piglet dies the date and cause of death should be recorded to maintain an accurate count of litter size. After the litter is weaned this information is collected and analyzed to evaluate the sow’s performance for each parity. 

## Pig Identification 
Producers need to be able to identify individual pigs to ensure accurate record keeping. When handling the pigs during processing it is useful to record piglet gender and teat counts on the sow card. For each pig, simply write down whether the piglet is a boar or gilt. Counting teats is another way to distinguish pigs from each other. The most efficient way to count teats is turn the pig over on its back. Count the number of teats on the left side and again on the right side. Make a note of any deformed or pin teats, counting only functional teats. This is useful when considering keeping any of the pigs for replacement stock. 

## Ear Notching 
The universal method for pig identification is ear notching, although ear tagging has gained popularity. However, ear notching remains the most practical and permanent means of ensuring proper identification. Ear notches identify the litter number and individual pig number for each animal. When looking at the pig, the litter number will be in the left ear and the individual pig number will be in the right ear. Reading ear notches can be difficult to understand at first, however with practice can be read very quickly. The only tool that is needed is a set of ear notchers that can be purchased at any farm supply or feed store. When notching, the pig’s ear is divided into quadrants. Each quadrant represents a number. Starting on the bottom of the ear nearest to the skull and moving around the ear, are the values 1, 3, 9, and 27. Each quadrant can have up to two notches. These values are added together to equal the number that should be represented.  

## Iron vaccine/ Wean D+E 
Administering an iron dose is vital for piglet development. Piglets that come in contact with dirt have access to the iron that is needed for growth. However, with the shift to farrowing in crates, pigs need to be given a dose of iron concentrate to eliminate the risk of anemia and other nutrient deficiencies. The most common method to give iron is by administering 1cc of 200mg of iron dextran using a 20x1/2’’ needle and injecting into the neck. To cope with other nutrient deficiencies that may arise, a dose of a vitamin supplement can also be given orally. Be sure to follow the label directions for each type of supplement.  

## Castrating
Castration is the surgical removal of testicles and is an important aspect of raising hogs. Any boar that does not have the potential to be kept for breeding stock should be castrated. This produces a higher meat quality, creates a safer working environment, and maintains humane conditions for the hogs. Castration is done at an early age to reduce the level of trauma that the pig experiences and it is easier for the producer. For castration, wear surgical gloves to ensure a better grip and to reduce risk of infection. Hold the boar piglet upside down by its rear legs. The pig can be held either with its back to the person doing the castrating chest or turned the other way around. Holding the rear legs in one hand, tilt the legs to extend the posterior muscles and more adequately displaying the testicles. Before cutting, make sure that both testicles are pushed up above your thumb and where the incisions will be made. When both testicles are exposed, make an incision in the middle of each bulge where the testicles are. The incisions should be approximately ¼ to a ½ long and only deep enough to cut the membrane surrounding the testicle, but not the testicle itself. Squeeze the area around the testicle until it pops out and then remove the testicle by pulling. Ensure that the cord is also removed for each testicle. Spray the incision sites with iodine to reduce infection.   

## Docking tails 
Docking tails is a common industry practice that is used to prevent injuries from pigs chewing on each other’s tails and causing animal welfare issues. To dock the tail, simply hold the pig upside down by its rear legs. And using a pair of side cutters, cut the tail approximately a ¼ of an inch from the base of the tail. 

In an ever changing and highly competitive agricultural market, it is not just a recommendation that piglets be processed in a manner that includes the aforementioned practices—it is essential. The practices of castration, record keeping, ear notching, and the administration of vaccines and iron shots among other things increases swine rate of gain, health scores, and general animal well-being. These factors all add value to a producers bottom line, thus making them more competitive in today’s modern swine production fields—cementing these practices into the main stream of swine production practices.

## Frequently asked questions: 
Q. Does castration and ear notching constitute cruelty towards the pig?
A. Much the same way that humans don’t remember getting their umbilical cord tied off or getting their first round of childhood vaccinations, so too do hogs forget the minor and short lived pain of castration, ear notching, etc.
Q. Are there more efficient ways of identifying hogs (like ear tags) rather than using a possibly outdated system like ear notching?
A. Hogs, due to their inquisitive and destructive nature, have a tendency to destroy less permanent forms of identification, like ear tags. This makes these forms of ID more suited to short term needs instead of methods of ID for the life of the animal.
Q. Does introducing vaccines into the lives of hogs make them dependent on modern pharmaceuticals to maintain their growth and production?
A. No, hogs would continue to stay on the same trajectory of growth if they did not have a number of these vaccines, but the vaccines do increase the number of hogs that make it to market by decreasing death loss rates.
